2: Environment Setup

To develop and test your ticketing system effectively, you'll need to install the following essential software components:

    Java Development Kit (JDK) 8 or Higher
        Purpose: Provides the necessary tools to develop and run Java applications.
        Installation:
            Download: Obtain the JDK from the Oracle website or use OpenJDK.
            Setup: Follow the installation instructions specific to your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux).
            Verification: After installation, verify by running java -version and javac -version in your command line.

    Eclipse Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
        Purpose: An IDE that facilitates writing, debugging, and managing Java code efficiently.
        Installation:
            Download: Get Eclipse IDE for Java Developers from the Eclipse website.
            Setup: Install by following the provided instructions.
            Recommendation: Choose the version that includes Maven and Git integration to streamline your workflow.

    Apache Maven
        Purpose: A build automation and dependency management tool essential for Java projects.
        Installation:
            Download: Obtain Maven from the Apache Maven website.
            Setup: Unpack the archive and configure the MAVEN_HOME environment variable.
            Verification: Run mvn -v to ensure Maven is correctly installed.

    Git Version Control System
        Purpose: Allows tracking changes in your codebase and facilitates collaboration.
        Installation:
            Download: Install Git from the official website.
            Setup: Follow the installation guide for your OS.
            Configuration: Set up your user name and email using:

            arduino

        git config --global user.name "Your Name"
        git config --global user.email "you@example.com"

MySQL Server

    Purpose: A relational database system to explore schema rigidity and transactional behavior.
    Installation:
        Download: Get MySQL Community Server from the MySQL website.
        Setup: Install using the installer, and configure the root password.
        Verification: Use the MySQL command-line client to ensure it's running.

MySQL Workbench

    Purpose: A graphical tool for MySQL database design and administration.
    Installation:
        Download: Obtain from the MySQL Workbench page.
        Setup: Install following the wizard.
        Usage: Connect to your MySQL server using the root credentials.

MongoDB Server

    Purpose: A NoSQL database to examine schema flexibility and nested data structures.
    Installation:
        Download: Get MongoDB Community Server from the MongoDB website.
        Setup: Install and configure the data directory (/data/db).
        Verification: Start the MongoDB service and use the Mongo shell to test the connection.

MongoDB Compass

    Purpose: A GUI for MongoDB to visualize and interact with data.
    Installation:
        Download: Obtain from the MongoDB Compass page.
        Setup: Install by following the instructions.
        Usage: Connect to your MongoDB instance to manage databases and collections.

JUnit Testing Framework

    Purpose: Facilitates writing and running unit tests for Java applications.
    Installation:
        Dependency: Include JUnit in your project's pom.xml file:

        xml

            <dependency>
                <groupId>junit</groupId>
                <artifactId>junit</artifactId>
                <version>4.13.2</version>
                <scope>test</scope>
            </dependency>

            Usage: Write test cases to ensure code correctness, especially for transactional operations.

    Mockaroo (Web Tool)
        Purpose: Generates realistic mock data for testing purposes.
        Access:
            Website: Use directly at Mockaroo.
        Usage: No installation needed; generate data in formats like CSV, SQL, or JSON.

Set Up Databases

With the necessary software installed, proceed to configure your databases.
1. MySQL Database Setup

    Start MySQL Server:
        Ensure the MySQL service is running. On Windows, it can be started from the Services panel; on macOS and Linux, use terminal commands.
    Create Database and User:
        Use MySQL Workbench or the command line to execute:

        sql

        CREATE DATABASE TicketingSystem;
        CREATE USER 'ticket_user'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'secure_password';
        GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON TicketingSystem.* TO 'ticket_user'@'localhost';
        FLUSH PRIVILEGES;

    Design Schema:
        Define tables and relationships as per your project's requirements, focusing on entities like Customers, Tickets, Orders, etc.

2. MongoDB Database Setup

    Start MongoDB Server:
        Ensure the MongoDB service is running. Use mongod command to start the server if necessary.
    Create Database and Collections:
        Use MongoDB Compass or the Mongo shell.
        Create a database named TicketingSystem and define collections such as customers, tickets, orders.
    Set Up Users:
        For authentication, create a user:

        javascript

        use TicketingSystem;
        db.createUser({
          user: "ticket_user",
          pwd: "secure_password",
          roles: [{ role: "readWrite", db: "TicketingSystem" }]
        });

Data Generation with Mockaroo

To populate your databases with test data:

    Define Data Schemas in Mockaroo:
        Customers:
            Fields: customer_id, name, email, username, password.
        Tickets:
            Fields: ticket_id, event_name, price, availability.
        Orders:
            Fields: order_id, customer_id, ticket_id, order_date.

    Generate and Download Data:
        Format Selection:
            For MySQL: Choose SQL or CSV.
            For MongoDB: Choose JSON.
        Download: Save the generated data files to your local machine.

    Import Data into Databases:
        MySQL:
            Use MySQL Workbench's import wizard or the LOAD DATA INFILE command.
            Example:

            sql

    LOAD DATA INFILE '/path/to/customers.csv' INTO TABLE Customers
    FIELDS TERMINATED BY ',' ENCLOSED BY '"'
    LINES TERMINATED BY '\n'
    IGNORE 1 ROWS;

MongoDB:

    Use the mongoimport tool.
    Example:

    bash

            mongoimport --db TicketingSystem --collection customers --file customers.json --jsonArray --username ticket_user --password secure_password

Additional Requirements and Recommendations

    Environment Variables:
        Set JAVA_HOME and add the JDK's bin directory to your system's PATH.
        Ensure Maven's bin directory is also in the PATH.

    Network Configuration:
        If your databases are hosted remotely or need to be accessed over a network, configure appropriate firewall settings and network permissions.

    IDE Enhancements:
        Install plugins for Eclipse:
            M2Eclipse: Enhances Maven integration.
            EGit: Integrates Git version control.
            Database Development: Tools like DBeaver for database browsing.

    Version Compatibility:
        Ensure that the versions of your JDK, Eclipse, Maven, MySQL, and MongoDB are compatible.
        Use stable releases to avoid unexpected issues.

    Security Practices:
        Use strong passwords for database users.
        Avoid using root or admin users for application connections.

    Testing Frameworks:
        Utilize JUnit for unit testing your Java code.
        Consider using Mockito for mocking database connections during tests.

    Documentation:
        Keep a detailed log of your setup process.
        Document configurations, versions, and any issues encountered.

    Backup Strategies:
        Regularly back up your databases to prevent data loss.
        Use database-specific backup tools or scripts.

